International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

International Journal of Medical Informatics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijmedinf

A method and validation for auditing e-Health applications based on
reusable software security requirements specifications
Carlos M. Mejía-Granda , José L. Fernández-Alemán , Juan M. Carrillo de Gea ,
José A. García-Berná *
Department of Informatics and Systems, Faculty of Computer Science, University of Murcia, Murcia 30100, Spain

A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T

Keywords: Objective: This article deals with the complex process of obtaining security requirements for e-Health applica-
e-Health tions. It introduces a tailored audit and validation methodology particularly designed for e-Health applications.
Requirements engineering Additionally, it presents a comprehensive security catalog derived from primary sources such as law, guides,
Medical software standards, best practices, and a systematic literature review. This catalog is characterized by its continuous
Audit methodology
Software security improvement, clarity, completeness, consistency, verifiability, modifiability, and traceability.
Software requirements specification Methods: The authors reviewed electronic health security literature and gathered primary sources of law, guides,

standards, and best practices. They organized the catalog according to the ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148:2018 standard
and proposed a methodology to ensure its reusability. Moreover, the authors proposed SEC-AM as an audit
method. The applicability of the catalog was validated through the audit method, which was conducted on a
prominent medical application, OpenEMR.
Results: The proposed method and validation for auditing e-Health Applications through the catalog provided a
comprehensive framework for developing or evaluating new applications. Through the audit of OpenEMR,
several security vulnerabilities were identified, such as DDOs, XSS, JSONi, and CMDi, resulting in a “Secure”
classification of OpenEMR with a compliance rate of 66.97%.
Conclusion: The study demonstrates the proposed catalog’s feasibility and effectiveness in enhancing health
software security. The authors suggest continuous improvement by incorporating new regulations, knowledge
from additional sources, and addressing emerging zero-day vulnerabilities. This approach is crucial for providing
practical, safe, and quality medical care amidst increasing cyber threats in the healthcare industry.

Abbreviations: AICPA, American Institute of Certified Public Accountants; Apps, Applications; ASD STIG, Application Security and Development Security Tech-
nical Implementation Guide; AWS, Amazon Web Services; CDSS, Clinical Decision Support Systems; CHS, Consumer health solutions; CIA, Confidentiality, Integrity,
and Availability; CMS, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; CMDi, CoMmanD injection; DAST, Dynamic Application Security Testing; DDOs, Distributed
Denial-of-service; DevSecOps, Development, Security, and Operations; DoS, Denial of Service; e-Health, electronic health; EHR, Electronic Health Record; EMR,
Electronic Medical Records; EMR-S, Electronic Medical Record Storage; HIE, Health Information Exchange; HIPAA, Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act; HIS, Hospital Information Systems; IAST, Interactive Application Security Testing; ICFR, Internal Controls over Financial Reporting; ISO, International Orga-
nization for Standardization; ISSO, Information System Security Officer; IT, Information technology; JSONi, JavaScript Object Notation injection; NFR, Non-Func-
tional Requirement; NIST, National Institute of Standards and Technology; NVD, National Vulnerability Database; OECD, Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development; ONC, Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology; OpenEMR, Open-source Electronic Medical Record; OWASP, Open
Web Application Security Project; PKI, public key infrastructure; PRISMA, Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis; RBAC, Role-based
access control; RPM, Remote patient monitoring; SA, System Administration; SAML, Security Assertion Markup Language; SAST, Static Application Security Testing;
SEC-AM, SECurity Audit Method; SEC-CAT, SECurity CATalog; SIREN, SImple Reuse of software requiremeNts; SLR, Systematic Literature Review; SOC, Systems and
Organization Controls; SOAP, Simple Object Access Protocol; SRE, security requirements engineering; SRS, Software Requirements Specification; XSLT, Extensible
Stylesheet Language Transformations; XSS, Cross-Site Scripting.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: carlosmichael.mejiag@um.es (C.M. Mejía-Granda), aleman@um.es (J.L. Fernández-Alemán), jmcdg1@um.es (J.M. Carrillo de Gea), josealberto.

garcia1@um.es (J.A. García-Berná).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2024.105699
Received 29 March 2024; Received in revised form 29 October 2024; Accepted 8 November 2024
Available online 10 November 2024 
1386-5056/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

1. Introduction the flexibility of EHR systems, gaps are revealed by focusing mainly on
the perspective of technical mechanisms. Hence, the need to delve into

The increasing adoption of software applications in the healthcare an approved and trustworthy set of security characteristics for e-Health
sector has significantly transformed the way healthcare services are applications remains.
delivered [1], facilitating online consultations, medical record man- One of the biggest challenges for implementing controls in SRE is
agement, and real-time monitoring of vital signs [2,3]. These digital extracting requirements from any source text of security requirements
platforms, known as e-Health applications, offer a wide range of func- [61]. These texts are often ambiguous, frequently updated, and contain
tionalities that improve the delivery of medical services and provide numerous cross-references and complicated exceptions, making them
advanced tools for disease diagnosis, health promotion, and EMR difficult to translate into concrete, verifiable software requirements
constitution [4,5]. [60,62,63,64]. Despite the methodologies and tools developed to

Privacy and software security are closely interconnected. However, improve the extraction of textual requirements, such as the proposals of
privacy refers to safeguarding personal data processed by the system, A. K. Massey et al. [22] that highlight the validation of software re-
while security refers to policies and procedures to protect assets critical quirements and designs against relevant regulations, a significant gap
to the system [6,7]. Several works address security in a focused and remains between regulations and a clear proposal or definition of a
separate manner [8,9,10]. A security requirement can be characterized single catalog of requirements and their practical implementation and
as a non-functional requirement (NFR) [11] that translates a higher- evaluation in the software has not been achieved [58,65,66].
level rule, regulation, or organizational directive into the specific sys- Harmonizing models through their combination and integration has
tem needs [12,13,14]. become a powerful tool for organizations, offering benefits such as

Sensitive information handled in e-Health applications requires high minimizing time and effort costs [67,68]. This document addresses the
levels of privacy and information security. As an illustrative example, critical need to improve enterprise information security by focusing on
ransomware attacks on healthcare delivery organizations have been on application-level security vulnerabilities and software analysis, design,
the rise, with incidents more than doubling between 2016 and 2021, and development deficiencies. It highlights the necessity of an audit or
exposing the personal health information of millions of patients [15]. validation method to technically test security approaches. The docu-
The cumulative cost of cybercrime in the world between 2020 and 2025 ment proposes a harmonized criterion for security features in e-Health
is expected to be $125 billion and, highlighting the severe privacy and applications, including a single catalog of security requirements. This
security risks associated with e-Health apps [16], which, despite their catalog focuses on security through a centralized repository, satisfying
advantages, can lead to significant social, legal, and financial re- the CIA security triad, and is traceable, applicable, reusable, and subject
percussions [17], including data breaches that result in civil penalties of to continuous improvement. It also includes a practical implementation
up to $25,000 per individual per violation, criminal penalties of up to and evaluation proposal for e-Health software against this catalog.
$250,000, and ten years in jail under HIPAA regulations [18,19], as well The article introduces a general software requirements specification
as losses of reputation and brand harm. These breaches have substantial (SRS) catalog for e-Health applications. The catalog sets technical and
financial and care costs, putting patients’ lives at risk due to decisions objective criteria for compliance and harmonization with laws, guide-
made with inaccurate information [20,21,22]. lines, standards, academic articles, and best practices, organized ac-

Security in healthcare software faces significant challenges due to cording to the ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148:2018 standard [69]. It uses the
errors in design and implementation. Research by McGraw [23] and SIREN methodology to ensure reuse and auditability [70]. The target
Smith [24] indicates that the majority of cyberattacks are due to a lack audience for this SRS includes those involved in designing, developing,
of attention to information security in companies and vulnerabilities in and auditing secure e-Health applications and requirements engineers.
the implementation of security requirements at the application level Additionally, it will assist senior management in defining the terms of
[25,26]. Other factors include the introduction of malicious code [27] reference and the minimum characteristics required for e-Health
and deficiencies in software analysis, design, and development products.
[28,29,30]. Unpredictable behaviors in e-Health systems can cause In summary, the main contributions of this article are:
critical availability problems [31,32] that put patients’ lives at risk
[33,34]. 1) A SLR on e-Health software and device security requirements.

There are various approaches, mechanisms, and technical initiatives 2) A reusable, traceable, applicable and updateable catalog of security
that are not necessarily linked to security requirements for validating control requirements for e-Health software according to the ISO/
and improving the security of medical software [35], including IEC/IEEE 29148:2018 standard [69].
encryption [36,37,38,39], secure data transfer protocols [40,41,42,43], 3) An audit method for evaluating security requirements for health e-
and defense mechanisms against physical and software vulnerabilities Health software.
[44,45,46,47,48]. Additionally, Blockchain-based frameworks 4) The validation of the proposed approach by generating a security
[49,50,51] and smart contracts [52,53,54] have been developed to requirements audit report for e-Health software.
ensure the integrity and availability of medical records in e-Health
systems [55,56,57]. The above proposals focus on the “how”. However, 2. Methods
inquiring into the “what” at a higher level of abstraction is often decisive
for increasing the security of medical software. The method used in this scientific work is composed of three stages:

H. S. Gardiyawasam Pussewalage et al. [7] presented seven general (i) An SLR, (ii) the construction of a catalog of security requirements,
privacy approaches based on HIPAA, suggestions for implementation and (iii) the development of an audit method aimed at verifying the
mechanisms such as cryptography and RBAC, and the need to consider a effectiveness of our catalog of requirements. The subsequent sections of
holistic approach to e-Health security. However, this proposal could be the document show the described process in detail.
complemented by an audit or validation method to technically test these
seven proposed mechanisms. 2.1. Research review

Rezaeibagha F et al. [58] systematically reviewed the literature on
EHR systems’ technical security perspectives, identifying 13 essential A SLR was performed to get security recommendations for e-Health
characteristics that were taken from the standards of ISO/IEC 27,002 software that follows the phases described below:
and ISO/IEC 27,001 [59,60]. The need to implement appropriate se-
curity and privacy policies and architectures to improve health software 2.1.1. Selecting data sources and the search string
is concluded since, after evaluating selected ISO standards concerning SCOPUS was selected to identify studies on security requirements

2 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

published between 1991 and 2023. It represents the most comprehen- separate areas to generate the PICO string.
sive source of high-quality, peer-reviewed publications for emerging As detailed in Table 1, the researchers established the following fil-
research fields [71]. It is the largest and most widely used bibliometric ters in the query entered into the SCOPUS database:
database for citation data, offering broad interdisciplinary coverage,
including biomedical sciences [72]. Several bibliographic studies have 1. Only articles published in the English language will be considered.
used SCOPUS as a primary source in their works [73,74]. Regarding our 2. As the subject area is limited to:
work, the literature search was conducted on July 9, 2023, and was • Computer Science
limited to “Title of the article, Abstract, Keywords”. Therefore, any work • Medicine
published after this date will not be considered for inclusion in the • Engineering
analysis. The PICO search string [75] is made up of the following • Health Professions
components and is described in Table 1 as follows: 3. Those established in the “Additional filters” section and the sub-

criterion “EXACTKEYWORD” were considered keywords.
1. The population or field of study: Patient or medic or clinic or care or
health. As a result of the initial search, 886 scientific papers1 were obtained

2. Software as the intervention. and subject to inclusion and exclusion criteria to maintain rigor and
3. Security as a factor of comparison. consistency in study selection.
4. As the outcomes: requirement or catalog or criteria or guide or
specification. 2.1.2. Inclusion and exclusion criteria

Research work must meet specific criteria to be included:
To reduce the possibility that the keywords used do not focus on the

literature related to security requirements in e-Health, an exhaustive • IC: The work furnishes insights into security guidelines, standards, or
investigation of the most recurrent keywords was carried out, which led requirements for e-Health software and devices.
to the creation of a co-occurrence map that illustrates the interrelation of
the keywords associated with the application of security in the field of e- Furthermore, for a research work to be excluded, it must satisfy any
Health. This map was generated using VOSviewer software (version of the conditions mentioned below:
1.6.20) [76]. Keywords were extracted from the last 20,000 of 63,436
articles related to “security and health”. The analysis resulted in a • EC1: The work does not provide a suggestion, list, or catalog of se-
collection of 1,000 words or phrases that appeared at least fifty-five curity requirements for software development.
times that included synonyms, abbreviations, repeated terms (such as • EC2: The work cannot be accessed.
“insurance”, “security”, “hospital”, “health”, “electronic medical record • EC3: The work does not provide requirements that differ from
”, “EMR”) and terms not related to the central topic (such as “article”, existing standards, norms, or best practices.
“review”, “model”, “survey”, “literature review”). The authors stan-
dardized the nomenclature, removed abbreviations with similar mean- Six scientific articles were not considered because they repeated
ings, and eliminated irrelevant terms. The new refined collection their title (duplicates), and after applying the EC1 and EC2 criteria,
consisted of 65 keywords related to safety and health. The most frequent another 877 were excluded.
terms and their interconnections are shown in Fig. 1. These keywords To apply EC1 during the full text review stage R4, a thorough anal-
guided researchers to construct wildcard nouns included into four ysis of each paper was carried out, carefully assessing its content in

relation to security guidelines, standards and regulations. In the
comprehensive review of the 69 articles, many highlighted the impor-

Table 1 tance of security in software development and explored security con-
PICO-compliant SLR search string for e-Health software security cepts in a general way. However, they did not provide practical
recommendations. guidance, structured catalogue, lists or recommendations of security
Scope String requirements. Rather than providing specific recommendations, these
Population ((“patient” OR “medic*” OR “clinic*” OR “care” OR “ health*”) papers presented a predominantly theoretical approach, without trans-

AND lating into guidelines applicable to healthcare software development.
Intervention (“software”) AND This analysis was based on the baseline SRS created by using ca-
Control (“secur*”) AND nonical sources from ISO, HIPAA, NIST, DISA STIG, OWASP, Canada
Outcomes (“requirement*” OR “catalog*” OR “criteria*” OR “guide*” OR Health Infoway CWE/SANS. By comparing each paper with the baseline

“specification*”)) AND
Additional (LIMIT-TO (SUBJAREA,“COMP”) OR LIMIT-TO SRS, it was possible to determine whether it provided additional and
filters (SUBJAREA,“MEDI”) OR LIMIT-TO (SUBJAREA,“ENGI”) OR useful information, with the aim of complementing, enriching and

LIMIT-TO (SUBJAREA,“HEAL”)) AND reinforcing previously established guidelines, standards, and regula-
(LIMIT-TO (LANGUAGE, “English”)) AND tions. The use of the baseline SRS as a reference was key to ensuring
(LIMIT-TO (EXACTKEYWORD, “Computer Security”) OR LIMIT-
TO (EXACTKEYWORD, “Security Of Data”) OR LIMIT-TO consistency and depth in the evaluation of each paper, thus strength-
(EXACTKEYWORD, “Security”) OR LIMIT-TO ening the e-health security framework.
(EXACTKEYWORD, “Network Security”) OR LIMIT-TO To apply EC3 in the exhaustive review of the remaining 44 articles
(EXACTKEYWORD, “Confidentiality”) OR LIMIT-TO during the full text review stage R4, requirements based on guidelines,
(EXACTKEYWORD, “Privacy”) OR LIMIT-TO (EXACTKEYWORD, recommendations, best practices, standards and regulations addressed
“Security Systems”) OR LIMIT-TO (EXACTKEYWORD, “Data
Privacy”) OR LIMIT-TO (EXACTKEYWORD, “Security in the baseline SRS were identified. As these items did not add value to
Requirements”) OR LIMIT-TO (EXACTKEYWORD, this already holistic and robust catalogue in the baseline SRS, they were
“Cryptography”) OR LIMIT-TO (EXACTKEYWORD, “Access discarded.
Control”) OR LIMIT-TO (EXACTKEYWORD, “Authentication”) Finally, three scientific works were selected after using the PRISMA
OR LIMIT-TO (EXACTKEYWORD, “Safety Engineering”) OR
LIMIT-TO (EXACTKEYWORD, “Specifications”) OR LIMIT-TO directive [77,78]. Fig. 2 shows the diagrammatic representation of
(EXACTKEYWORD, “Security And Privacy”) OR LIMIT-TO PRISMA’s proposed flowchart for determining scientific articles on
(EXACTKEYWORD, “Safety”) OR LIMIT-TO (EXACTKEYWORD,
“Information Security”) OR LIMIT-TO (EXACTKEYWORD,
“Cybersecurity”)) 1 https://bit.ly/4ds2xw3.

3 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

Fig. 1. Keyword co-occurrence map for security in health. Source: elaborated by the authors using VOSviewer software.

studies were included in our final analysis. Nevertheless, to guarantee
inclusion of numerous pertinent primary studies, considering the key-
words in the search string detailed in Table 1, we have added the terms
“issue” and “challenge” in the search string, recovering 3,272 publica-
tions between 1991 and 2023. These were exported in.csv format from
SCOPUS, of which 23 duplicates and 926 articles in the original search
chain were excluded, resulting in 2,323 new articles.

A sensitivity analysis of the publications obtained from the Scopus
database was performed to evaluate the accuracy of the results con-
cerning security in e-Health applications. This evaluation was done by
randomly selecting a subset of publications from the complete list and
reviewing their relationship to the field of study. The number of docu-
ments selected for validation was determined using Cochran’s sample
size formula (1) [79]:

(1) n NZ2p(1− p)
=

(N− 1)e2+Z2p(1− p)

Where:

• n is the number of documents randomly selected for validation,
• N is the total number of publications obtained from the Scopus
database (2,323),

• Z is the deviation from the accepted mean value for the confidence
level (1.96 for a 95 % confidence level).

• e is the margin of error (0.05),
Fig. 2. PRISMA diagram of the SLR of security recommendations. • p is the proportion of invalid expected results (0.08, randomly

selected and expected to be low).
security recommendations for e-Health applications and devices.

Many papers were excluded because they did not meet these specific A sample of 108 publications was required for validation, and of
criteria or were duplicates. Our goal was to maintain rigor and consis- these, none presented security requirements with a formal structure or
tency in our study selection, ensuring that only the most pertinent format, resulting in a proportion of 0 % of invalid results (8 % expected).

4 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

2.2. Security requirements catalog Table 2
Requirements extracted from document sources.

The SIREN methodology guides this catalog to ensure that re- Document source Requirements
quirements are reusable, traceable, applicable, and auditable. It in- Associated
corporates templates and a repository of reusable requirements D. L. Hamilton [87] 7
organized according to international recommendations [70]. SIREN uses H. J. Baur, U. Engelmann, F. Saurbier, A. Schröter, U. Baur, 7
a spiral process model inspired by Kotonya and Sommerville [80] that and H. P. Meinzer [88]
covers the extraction, analysis, negotiation, documentation, and vali- A. Strielkina, O. Illiashenko, M. Zhydenko, and D. Uzun [89] 1

dation phases, adhering to standards like IEEE 830–1998 [81] and ISO/ ISO 27002:2022 [60] 9
ISO 27799:2016 [90] 18

IEC/IEEE 29148:2018 [69]. HIPAA [91] 1
Previous works have employed SIREN to create reusable horizontal HIPAA Security rules [92] 16

catalogs of sustainability, usability, and internationalization re- National Institutes of Standards and Technology (NIST) SP 29
quirements [5,82,83] and vertical catalogs about CARE tools and tele- 800–53 rev. 5 [93]

Canada Health Infoway: Privacy & Security Requirements 23
operated systems [84,85]. The framework complies with the eight key and Considerations for Digital Health Solutions [94].
precepts for an effective requirements process [86]: DISA STIG Application Security and Development Security 108

Technical Implementation Guide: 2022 [95]
• K1. Organization of the reusable requirements: Structure and orga- Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) Top 10 34

nize the requirements to facilitate their reuse and reduce search time. Web Application Security Risks:2021 [96]
CWE/SANS TOP 25 Most Dangerous Software Errors: 2021 19

• K2. Search engine for reusable requirements: Facilitates an intuitive [97]
search to meet the needs of engineers.

• K3. Requirement selection and reuse with different granularity
levels: Allows specific requirements to be reused.

• K4. Requirement attributes reuse: Defines a common set of attributes
based on the IEEE standard, allowing changes and the addition of
new attributes.

• K5. Traceability relationships reuse: Connect entities within the
same artifacts, managing variability through parent and child
requirements.

• K6. Parameterized requirements management: Allows requirements
values to be parameterized according to the specific application.

• K7. Repository improvement: Supports the creation of new cate-
gories and requirements.

• K8. CARE support to reuse: Provides data necessary for entry into any
chosen application, with support from tools.

Additionally, for the articles obtained from Section “2.1 Research
Review”, the requirements extraction was also based on various laws,
guidelines, and standards2 according to the specialized knowledge in Fig. 3. Security Catalog Creation Process.
software security that the authors have. OECD Privacy Principles, GDPR,
privacy legislation in the United Kingdom and Canada, and other re- 1. They acquired knowledge: Study of the relevant norms, standards,
sources oriented toward privacy will not be considered since this work and procedures, and analysis of their structure and terminology to
focuses on security. A summary of the requirements for each source define selection criteria.
document is presented in Table 2 below. 2. Identification of Information: Identification of the information

The catalog creation process involves four stages: step one begins by from the documents to be combined and organized was identified.
identifying the appropriate sources, literature research, and standards. 3. Correspondence Process: Homogenization through an objective
Next, the requirements for security are extracted from the sources. The pairing of the information and the elements of the model process
catalog SEC-CAT is generated based on the extracted criteria. A fourth about each of the aspects of the OWASP Top 10 structure.
step is followed to maintain and develop the catalog. Fig. 3 illustrates the
catalog creation process. Comparison technique: It allows the identification of differences

SEC-CAT is supported in the ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148:2018 structure and similarities between the regulatory documents [100]. The process
[69] and presents the requirements classified in the OWASP Top 10 Web followed was:
Application Security Risks: 2021 scheme [96]. Table 3 provides an
overview of the catalog’s structure. 1. Expert Analysis: Two experts in secure software development

A requirement may have more than one source since various docu- analyzed each requirement obtained from the documents.
ments referred to and studied have been considered. To avoid over- 2. Identification of Differences and Similarities: A comparison was
lapping concepts in the requirements contained in the SEC-CAT, the carried out to identify how the requirements of the analyzed docu-
authors performed a harmonization of the source documents by ments align or do not align with the OWASP Top 10 structure pro-
applying a process adapted from the framework proposed by C. Pardo et posed in the SRS, discarding requirements that are essentially the
al [98]. This process includes two main techniques: homogenization and same.
comparison. 3. Level of Coverage: The experts determined the level of coverage of

Homogenization Technique: The objective of homogenization is to the sources.
prepare the documents for later comparative analysis [99]. The steps 4. Review of Results: At the end of each comparison iteration, the
followed were: experts reviewed the results again to verify their reliability and that

of the comparison process.
2 https://bit.ly/3SB0CNI.

5 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

Table 3 Financial Reporting) to ensure consistent processing and reliable
Table of contents (IEEE 29148:2018). transactions and data manipulation [102]; SOC 2, which provides in-
Introduction formation and assurance about security controls, availability, processing
SRS overview integrity, confidentiality and privacy in a service organization [103];
Purpose and SOC 3, similar to SOC 2 but less detailed and general purpose,
Scope allowing its free distribution [104]. Some tools have been proposed to
Product perspective
Product functions support SOC: Vanta,4 Drata,5 Tugboat Logic,6 Strike Graph,7 Audit-
User characteristics Board8 and Secureframe.9 Compared to these tools, our catalog-based
Limitations audit method offers greater flexibility to adapt the audit method
Limitations framework, with a finer control to select, refine, extend, and narrow
Assumptions and dependencies
Apportioning of requirements down the security requirements for which compliance will be verified.
Requirements Organizations can easily adopt our lightweight audit method, adaptable
Specified requirements to any process, and develop their own catalogs by using any evolving
External Interfaces source of security requirements.
Functions This section outlines an audit methodology designed to assess the
Usability requirements
Performance Requirements security of e-Health software, characterized by objectivity, usability,
Logical database requirements agility, systematicity, and repeatability. The SEC-AM is an adaptation of
Design constraints methodologies proposed in similar audit methods [105,106,107],
Standards compliance tailored specifically for security considerations in requirements engi-
Software system attributes
Reliability neering. This proposed audit method builds upon the CISA standard
Availability framework, aiming to enhance “Domain 1: Information Systems Audit-
Security ing Process” by refining the planning and execution phases of the audit.
Broken Access Control The objective and scope of the security audit are comprehensively
Cryptographic Failures detailed in section “2.3.3 Phases and Activities of SEC-AM” of the article,
Injection
Insecure Design particularly within the subsections “a. Context Analysis” and “b. SEC-
Security Misconfiguration CAT* Generation.” A unique contribution of SEC-AM is the incorpora-
Vulnerable and Outdated Components tion of a specialized team that analyzes the relevant information security
Identification and Authentication Failures conditions of the software product under evaluation, as depicted in
Software and Data Integrity Failures
Security Logging and Monitoring Failures Fig. 4.
Server-Side Request Forgery (SSRF)
Verification 2.3.1. Artifacts of SEC-AM
Supporting Information As a consequence of the interaction of the different actors involved in
References the Security Audit Process, the following artifacts are generated:

In our security requirements catalog, according to IEEE 830–1998 • SEC-CAT: The catalog of security requirements outlined in the above
[81], each requirement includes attributes such as Unique ID (PUID), section is the base element of the audit method since it collects
description, source, rationale, verification method, validation criteria, knowledge about standards, guides, regulations, and research
priority, justification, etc., enabling traceability relationships to be inherent in security.
defined and parameterizable to adapt to different applications, ensuring • SEC-CAT*: Generally, it is an adaptation of SEC-CAT to the appli-
reuse. A catalog of security requirements elicited from the main norms, cation where the audit method will be applied, containing a subset of
standards, guides and procedures allows for communication at the requirements but retaining all the properties specified within each
managerial and operational level. Stakeholders do not need technical requirement.
knowledge to understand the system functionality. Only PUID, • Checklist: This is a list of elements that will be verified against the e-
description, and rationale are mandatory attributes. A requirement may Health system in the study. It is generated based on the SEC-CAT*
have more than one source since various documents referred to and artifact and can take on the form most appropriate to the audited
studied have been taken into account. software. It may consist of a web-based questionnaire or any other

The authors present 142 security requirements distributed in 10 electronic or paper format. In our case, the Checklist is in paper
subcategories according to the OWASP top ten 2021 [101], detailed in format.
Section “2.9.3. Security” of the ”Software Requirements Specification • Audit report: This is the result of the audit process and may
for Security on e-Health applications“3 document. Table 4 presents an comprise preliminary, in-depth reports and a final report that in-
example of the requirements catalog with its base sources, extracted cludes the security deficiencies, areas to improve in the audited
from the requirements document mentioned above: subsection 2.9.3.1 application, the audit team’s recommendations, and a summary of
Broken Access Control, page 16. the primary vulnerabilities.

2.3.2. Roles of SEC-AM
2.3. Audit method The audit technique is carried out by the players or roles listed

below:
Software security audit and risk management methods have been

proposed for generating certifications to increase user confidence,
considering the impact of IT on financial statements [102]. One of the
most used is the SOC (Systems and Organization Controls), developed by 4 https://www.vanta.com/demo.
the AICPA (American Institute of Certified Public Accountants), which 5 https://drata.com/.
includes: SOC 1, which evaluates the ICFR (Internal Control over 6 https://tugboatlogic.com/.

7 https://www.strikegraph.com/.
8 https://www.auditboard.com/.

3 https://bit.ly/4fMJhLV. 9 https://secureframe.com/.

6 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

Table 4
Example of a requirement. The source field has two items.
PUID: [SEC-CAT-BAC-003]

Requirement description: The application must implement security measures to prevent the elevation of privileges. Prevent situations where a user can act without being
authenticated or an administrator can act as a regular user after logging in.

Source:
A01:2021 – Broken Access Control: Avoid elevation of privilege. Acting as a user without being logged in or acting as an admin when logged in as a user [3].
CWE-306: Missing Authentication for Critical Function: The product does not perform any authentication for functionality that requires a provable user identity or consumes a
significant amount of resources [14].

• Client: Any individual or business needing an audit to assess the with backgrounds as requirements engineers or analysts are
security characteristics of an e-Health system. preferred.

• Engineering Team (EN): The group responsible for developing,
installing, setting up, or managing the e-Health system. 2.3.3. Phases and activities of SEC-AM

• Security Team (SE): The team is tasked with analyzing and The following are the tasks included in the security audit process:
formulating security policies and configurations, assessing vulnera-
bilities, conducting penetration tests, and providing detailed insights a. Context analysis: The EN Team thoroughly examines the opera-
into the vulnerabilities within the e-Health system. tional settings and conditions of the targeted e-Health system for the

• Audit Team: The person or group in charge of completing the audit audit. It involves thoroughly assessing its context, encompassing
should ideally have previous expertise in auditing e-Health systems; background information, environment, purpose, scope, user profiles,
however, this is not mandatory. and other pertinent factors. Subsequently, leveraging the functional

• Requirement Engineering Team (RE): Group or people who context provided by the EN Team, the SE Team formulates security
elaborated and maintained the SEC-CAT and SEC-CAT*. Individuals policies, defines configurations, outlines the execution environment,

Fig. 4. Security Audit Method (SEC-AM).

7 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

identifies risks, and specifies the desirable behavior for the applica- • CMS Reporting
tion under audit. • Lab Integration

b. SEC-CAT* generation: The RE equipment, considering the context • Clinical Decision Rules
analysis described in the previous step, defines a new adapted cat- • Advanced Security
alog from the requirements specified in the SEC-CAT. • Multilanguage Support

c. Generate Checklist: The audit team establishes the Checklist for
conducting the audit, using the SEC-CAT* as a basis. This comprehensive evaluation was performed by Oct. 19, 2023,

d. Execute the audit: The Security Team (SE) experts thoroughly extracting pertinent information from the official website [120]. Further
examine the application under audit, utilizing a thorough checklist. details regarding OpenEMR can be accessed in Table 5.
Nowadays, for the analysis and audit of vulnerabilities, there are
some approaches: 3.2. Generate SEC-CAT*

Starting from the context analysis, the RE Equipment generated the
SEC-CAT*10 adapted from the SEC-CAT11 proposed in our research.

• SAST (Static Application Security Testing) to detect problems in the Since OpenEMR is not released to a specific user group, the default
source code before its implementation. [108] values have been taken to those requirements containing configurable

• DAST (Dynamic Application Security Testing) to evaluate security parameters.
while the application is being executed in a real environment. [109]

• IAST (Interactive Application Security Testing) evaluates the appli-
cation while running and analyzes the source code simultaneously. 3.3. Generate Checklist
[110]

• Manual testing is used to assess specific requirements compliance In this phase, a Checklist will be produced from the SEC-CAT*, which
with the application. [111] was utilized by the audit team to assess the OpenEMR application. In the

specific instance of this audit, the Checklist document,12 consisted of
A combination of three approaches has been selected because of the 142 items, and each check element will possess the subsequent potential

comprehensive battery of tests to detect bad practices and possible response alternatives:
vulnerabilities in applications that combine SAST (HP Fortify SCA
V4.40) [112], DAST (with Acunetix v 23.7.230728157) [113] and a • “Yes” if the condition is consistently met.
manual assessment for specific security requirements [114]. • “No” if the condition is not consistently met.

• “N/a” when the condition is not applicable.
e. Generate audit report: This phase encompasses the prospective
establishment of interim audit reports, succeeded by the subsequent Partial responses were disregarded due to their lack of contribution
compilation of the conclusive audit report. During this stage, the to the security requirements. Non-compliance is inferred from the
audit team assembles comprehensive outcomes from the audit violation of a single-premise argument. The security coverage of the
technique, integrating thorough information and suggestions into application was then assessed in terms of the total percentage score
the final report. obtained, which was subsequently discretized into a 5-interval scale

using an unsupervised global discretization method [121]. This
3. Results approach is a modified version of equal width interval binning [122],

where the lower and upper bins are smaller than the others, aiming to
To validate the SEC-CAT presented in this research, a comprehensive differentiate between extreme scores and categorize each assessment

audit was conducted on an actual open-source e-Health application, into:
leveraging access to the source code for a thorough examination. The
selected application was OpenEMR v7.0 [115], acknowledged as the • Very high coverage
premier open-source platform for electronic medical records and med- • High coverage
ical practice management, and it holds ONC 2015 Cures Update certi- • Moderate coverage
fication. OpenEMR boasts widespread global usage, with over 100,000 • Low coverage
medical professionals in more than 100 countries providing healthcare • Very low coverage
services to a patient population exceeding 90 million people globally
[116,117,118]. The insights derived from this audit aim to benefit the The score boundaries for every group are specified in Table 6.
application’s present and future users.

The audited software is available for Docker, AWS Cloud, Windows, Table 5
and Linux Systems [119]. OpenEMR was analyzed employing the SEC- Information on OpenEMR v7.0 from its official website.
AM. The complete process is detailed as follows. Name: OpenEMR

3.1. Context analysis Developer: Open-emr.org
Category EHR and medical practice management solution
Supported platforms Windows, Linux, Mac OS X

The initial stage of the SEC-AM method involves examining the Version 7.0.0
application, users, software attributes, potential deployment settings, Last update 11/12/2023
functionality, and components. The audited application has the Compatible idioms More than thirty

Source Open source
following functionality: License GNU General Public License

Main language PHP + MySQL
• Patient Demographics
• Patient Scheduling
• EMR 10 https://bit.ly/3SBypWV.
• e-Prescribing 11 https://bit.ly/4fMJhLV.
• Medical Billing 12 https://bit.ly/3SHjwm3.

8 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

3.4. Audit execution and audit report

The outcomes following the meticulous application of the SEC-AM
detailed process to the OpenEMR application are depicted in Fig. 5.
Additionally, the audit team conducted a thorough analysis, intricately
documenting comprehensive details of the code files affected by each
vulnerability uncovered during the DAST and SAST scans. This
exhaustive examination involved scrutinizing all recorded results in the
Checklist, ultimately leading to the development of the final report.13

4. Discussion

Upon reviewing all checklist items, the security coverage percentage
of the OpenEMR application is calculated to be 66.97 %. Of the 142
items assessed, 88 were deemed compliant (“YES”), while 35 did not
meet the specified criteria. Furthermore, 19 items were marked as “N/
A”. Alternatively, if we focus solely on the 123 items applicable to the
application (either “YES” or “NO”), the security level of OpenEMR
stands at 71.54 %. Consequently, the application is classified by the Fig. 5. Checklist responses.
percentage obtained in the “High coverage” category. The most common
vulnerabilities in OpenEMR were DDOs, XSS, JSONi, and CMDi. Table 7 formation, focused attention becomes crucial by requiring users to
presents the details of the vulnerabilities detected according to the accept the terms and conditions before accessing the application in
method used. adherence to the applicable legal measures [126].

Effective access control is crucial for minimizing the risk of security Four items on the Checklist are flagged as “No” due to inherent
breaches, enhancing operational efficiency, and reducing the potential vulnerabilities arising from an insecure design, encompassing issues
for users to initiate DOs or DDOs attacks that could overwhelm server such as the lack of isolation between user and management function-
resources [123]. However, OpenEMR has been found to have a defi- alities, the consolidation of all functions within a general-purpose
ciency in access control, specifically in the lack of implementation or server, the inclusion of authentication data in code files, and potential
enforcement of dual access control measures before deleting medical manipulation of routes. This non-compliance escalates the risk of un-
and user records, leading to a “No” assessment. Failure to adhere to this authorized access, undermining the certainty that system management
requirement exposes the system to the possibility that a single user could functions are exclusively executed by authorized personnel and devi-
carry out critical or sensitive actions without additional supervision, ating from established data protection practices. Approximately 74 % of
thereby increasing the risk of privilege abuse and malicious activities. security breaches are linked to human factors like errors, privilege
This deficiency also directly threatens the integrity and confidentiality misuse, stolen credentials, or social engineering [127].
of stored information, allowing a single user to access sensitive data Four additional items in the Checklist are marked as “No” and are
without the necessary oversight. linked to security misconfigurations. These include (i) lack of security

Three identified issues, marked as “No”, are linked to deficiencies in configurations, (ii) insufficient anti-DDOs security settings, (iii) disclo-
data entry validation measures, posing potential vulnerabilities to XSS, sure of technical details to users in case of errors, and (iv) no secure flag
XSLT, JSON, and CMDi. Previous research anticipates a rising trend in configuration in cookies. In contemporary cybersecurity, mis-
security breaches within medical care devices and software [124]. Ac- configuration is one of the most formidable risks [128].
cording to Static Application Security Testing (SAST), OpenEMR ex-
hibits susceptibility to 20 XSS-related vulnerabilities in its PHP files,
primarily within the administrator and medical history reviewer mod- Table 7

Vulnerabilities found.
ules. Recent studies highlight that code or command injection is a severe
threat capable of disrupting program execution, potentially leading to Vulnerability Detection Flaws

data loss, corruption, accountability issues, or denial of access [125]. method number

User notification before granting access is not complied with by Authentication and password problems Manual 8
OpenEMR, so one check is assessed as “No”. Consequently, users do not Log weaknesses 7

Account management 1
know the property of the system, the monitoring, recording, and No notification before granting access 1
auditing of use, the penalties for unauthorized use, and the acceptance of Separation of system and user functionality 1
these conditions. In systems dealing with confidential and critical in- Application housed on a general-purpose 1

server
No notifications or alerts for product updates 1

Table 6 XSS SAST 20
Path manipulation 7

Security coverage score groups. JSON injection 7
Security Coverage Group Interval score Misconfiguration 4

DDOs 3
Very high coverage (87.5 % − 100 %] Password Management 2
High coverage (62.5 % − 87.5 %] Command Injection 2
Moderate coverage (37.5 % − 62.5 %] Header manipulation 1
Low coverage (12.5 % − 37.5 %] XSLT 1
Very low coverage [0 % − 12.5 %] Variable override 1

Vulnerable packages dependencies DAST 21
Misconfiguration 13
Display of sensitive information 6
Outdated libraries 5
Weak cryptography 2

13 https://bit.ly/4d78UVZ. Hardcoded passwords 1

9 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

Three Checklist requirements concerning Vulnerable and Outdated Another security flaw in OpenEMR is the lack of robust security
Components have been identified as “No”. OpenEMR lacks notifications logging and monitoring. Security records lack specific information,
or updates regarding product updates; instead, it contains outdated li- automatic backup of audited records is not conducted, and audit records
braries, some of which may even lack support. Insufficient allocation of are not retained for a designated period. Additionally, there is no con-
time and resources by organizations for the timely updating of software figurable mechanism to transfer audit records to a different system for
and ensuring system security has resulted in critical vulnerabilities [31]. further analysis, audit records when a concurrent session is not pro-
Outdated systems become fertile ground for attackers to inject malware duced, and there is no option to alert the ISSO and the SA in case of a
into EMR systems, potentially leading to the execution of malicious code failure in audit processing. When different actions and application
and compromising the system functionality, causing disruptions in pa- configurations are not audited, identifying attempted attacks will be
tient care and medical operations. Unauthorized access by attackers challenging, and there will be no audit trail for forensic investigation of
further jeopardizes patient data confidentiality, integrity, and avail- actions taken after the fact [95].
ability. Beyond security breaches, attackers seek healthcare data for One check was marked as “N/a” because OpenEMR is not only an API
financial gain, exploiting insurance credentials and swiftly accumu- that offers methods: PUT, POST, DELETE, or GET linked to a flexible
lating profits through fraudulent activities [31]. The heightened risk of access flow. So, the requirement is not applicable. Another check was
data breaches exposes sensitive patient information to unauthorized evaluated as “N/a” because it relates to message encryption when the
parties and carries significant legal, financial, and reputational impli- SessionIndex is linked to privacy data. However, OpenEMR does not link
cations for healthcare providers. The presence of vulnerable or outdated SessionIndex to privacy data. Twelve more checks are classified as “ N/a
components also threatens regulatory compliance, such as with HIPAA ” because they are related to elements and ways of communication using
in the United States, resulting in legal consequences and penalties. SAML assertions in SOAP messages. However, audited software does not
Additionally, manipulating or altering medical records due to known implement SOAP messages as described in the requirements. Four
vulnerabilities in outdated components directly threatens patient safety, identification and authentication failure checks qualified as “N/a”
emphasizing the urgency for healthcare organizations to implement because audited OpenEMR does not implement PKI-based authentica-
robust security practices; it includes regular software updates, patching, tion. Finally, one requirement is “N/a” related to non-signed or non-
comprehensive vulnerability assessments, and adherence to industry encrypted serialized data not sent to non-reliable customers without
best practices in healthcare cybersecurity to proactively uphold the integrity verification or digital signature. The audit team has reviewed
integrity of EMR systems and safeguard sensitive information. the software documentation, and there is no information about this

Seven requirements associated with identification and Authentica- feature; consequently, it does not apply.
tion Failures are checked as “No”. It was due to (i) a lack of safe login In OWASP Top 10 [96] and the DISA ASD STIG [95], there are
procedures that protect against login attempts by brute force, (ii) several recommendations to solve the safety gaps and identified re-
missing reauthentication before executing critical actions, (iii) flaws in quirements promptly in the SV-222624R864409_RULE of DISA ASD
password and account management, and (iv) lack in restrict the duration STIG, the importance of automated Fuzzing tests with manual corrob-
of connections to application services. These seven identified flaws oration is based.
significantly contribute to the vulnerability of EMR systems, creating an
environment conducive to brute-force attacks. In such attacks, malicious 4.1. Lessons learnt
actors persistently try to gain unauthorized access, compromising the
system integrity. The absence of reauthentication requirements before The features met in the proposed framework foster applicability,
executing critical actions, such as modifying medical records or auditability, reusability and traceability:
accessing sensitive information, further exacerbates these security risks.
Weak or easily exploitable passwords become potential targets for at- 1. Applicability: Meets industry standards, ensuring relevance for
tackers, undermining the confidentiality and security of patient infor- various e-Health applications. The SIREN methodology supports this
mation within OpenEMR. Extended connection durations present a vast by providing structured and standardized requirements.
opportunity for attackers to exploit vulnerabilities, potentially leading 2. Auditability: Uses a comprehensive audit methodology that com-
to unauthorized access, data manipulation, or service disruptions. It is bines DAST, SAST and manual assessments, with the SEC-CAT tool
imperative to counter these security consequences in EMR systems by facilitating compliance assessment and detailed audit reports.
adopting robust login procedures, enforcing reauthentication measures 3. Reusability: Includes a repository of reusable requirements, struc-
for critical actions, enhancing password and account management tured for easy adaptation to different applications, supported by the
practices, and implementing appropriate session duration restrictions. A SIREN methodology and allowing parameterization.
captcha mechanism can mitigate force attacks [129,130]. 4. Traceability: Requirements are organized in catalogs according to

Five checklist items associated with software and data integrity were ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148:2018 and OWASP Top 10 Web Application
marked as “No”. The audit team cannot prove that OpenEMR libraries Security Risks: 2021, with detailed attributes that allow tracking
and components are exclusively obtained from official sources, thereby throughout their lifecycle.
lacking secure mechanisms for the software supply chain. Likewise, it
has not been demonstrated that the coding reviewing process through Through the audit of security requirements in e-Health applications,
continuous integration channels/deployment to prevent the inclusion of we have identified several valuable lessons that can benefit both re-
malicious code or configurations is satisfied. The absence of assurance in searchers and professionals in the field of computer security and health
these aspects poses tangible risks, as acquiring software from unofficial applications. Below are the most notable lessons from our research:
repositories exposes it to potential malware, leading to infections in both
the central system and clients’ devices [131]. Malware can spread across 1. Use of Checklists for Combined Assessments: The proposed audit
the entire hospital network, resulting in unavailability, disruptions, and methodology, which includes a checklist, made it possible to eval-
data loss [132]. To address these critical vulnerabilities within EMR uate the quality of the application under test through a combination
systems, enforcing stringent policies mandating the exclusive sourcing of DAST (Dynamic Application Security Testing), SAST (Static
of libraries and components from reputable, official channels is imper- Application Security Testing) approaches and manual evaluations.
ative. Furthermore, implementing a robust and continuous code review This combined approach provides a comprehensive and detailed
process through integration channels becomes pivotal in averting the view of application security, improving audit accuracy.
inclusion of malicious code, thereby safeguarding the security, integrity, 2. SRS Enrichment for Health Applications: The security re-
and reliable operation of the EMR system. quirements audit revealed that the SRS (Software Requirements

10 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

Specification) product within the framework of this research can provide a comprehensive catalog of safety requirements for e-Health
significantly clarify and enrich the landscape of desired security re- software with rationale and validation criteria that are continually
quirements for health-related applications. This will help developers improvable, unambiguous, complete, consistent, verifiable, modifiable,
and auditors to better understand the expectations and standards and traceable over time.
necessary to ensure the security of these applications. Security requirements engineering in e-Health must adapt to current

3. Facilitation of Compliance with SEC-CAT: The SEC-CAT tool challenges, incorporating solid practices and advanced technologies to
facilitated the compliance assessment of existing or newly developed protect patient data and ensure system reliability. Requirements should
applications, providing a clear understanding of the situational sta- be based on existing regulations, guides, standards, and best practices to
tus of the software product through the audit report. This tool is improve regulatory compliance and software quality. This approach
crucial to ensure that applications meet established security increases productivity, security, and quality throughout the software
requirements. development.

4. Involvement of Security Experts: In the proposed framework (SEC- Similarly, this work presents an SEC-AM audit method to evaluate
AM), the participation of computer security experts is essential to safety in e-Health applications through a requirement catalog. The
ensure proper audit scope and effective identification of vulnerabil- catalog and the audit method were validated in OpenEMR, one of the
ities. The experience and knowledge of a specialized security team most popular applications for managing electronic medical records. The
are vital to effectively identify and mitigate potential vulnerabilities. proposed audit method measures the security of an application

5. Expansion of Recommendations with SEC-CAT: SEC-CAT can following the criteria of the security catalog adapted to the application
enrich and expand established recommendations and controls, (SEC-CAT*). The security classification obtained after applying the SEC-
serving as a technical complement to the requirements for test cases AM places the software in the “secure” category. Considering that
in the security of health applications, especially those aimed at Checklist is based on closed response options: “Yes”, “No”, or “N/a”,
meaningful use of data. This tool provides an additional layer of rigor SEC-AM was a simple process and did not present any difficulty for the
and detail in security assessment. auditor’s team.

6. Complement to IT Governance: Security analysis work from the The SEC-AM, designed as an iterative method, exhibits complexity
operational level complements and strengthens IT governance, ac- and execution time correlating with the number of requirements to be
curate decision-making and cyber-attack prevention by corporate evaluated. In our specific scenario, SEC-CAT comprises 142 re-
leaders, senior managers, IT cybersecurity professionals and experts, quirements that necessitate assessment through a comprehensive
and specialists in cybersecurity interested in strategic issues. Inte- approach involving SAST, DAST, and manual verification.
grating operational analytics improves cyber resilience and incident Therefore, organizations interested in the security of e-Health ap-
response capabilities. plications and the certification of EHR systems can leverage SEC-CAT to

7. Importance of Effective Leadership: Effective leadership is crucial evaluate, audit, or enhance the safety measures for testing software
to ensuring corporate attention to information security, fostering a products better before introducing them to the market.
culture of cyber resilience and developing a comprehensive approach The authors of this scientific work have reported the vulnerabilities
to security. This includes involvement and support of senior man- detected in the OpenEMR v7.0.0 software to the OpenEMR community,
agement in cybersecurity strategies to improve governance, inte- ensuring that the issues are known and validated and that risk mitigation
gration and transformational support in digital business practices are implemented to enhance the security of this vital health-
environments [133]. care application; the vulnerabilities were submitted via email, as spec-

8. Improvements in Process Automation: Tooling support can ified on the official software portal.
improve the audit process thus saving time and reducing error-prone As part of future work, the research team could develop a method-
activities. As a result, the effectiveness and efficiency of the process ology for manual verification and exploitation of possible vulnerabilities
are enhanced. Since we currently lack a specific support tool for the in e-Health software for training purposes. A guide and recommenda-
method, our research group is making efforts to adapt another NFR tions with practical examples to help software developers avoid and
audit tool focused on usability to the security domain [134]. solve safety bugs can be proposed.

To complete the audit method outlined in this research, an open-
Finally, the lessons learned from this research improve our under- source computer tool supported by artificial intelligence could be

standing of security in e-Health applications and provide valuable developed to automate the assessment of organizational security con-
guidance for future research and practice. trols, encompassing policy controls, versioning, infrastructure, and

deployment. This automation will draw upon periodically published
4.2. Threats to validity vulnerabilities from the NVD and a customized catalog of security re-

quirements. On the other hand, a more fine-grained measure of a sys-
Two kinds of threats to validity are discussed below: tem’s vulnerability should be provided. Obviously, a higher percentage
Construct validity: Threats to validity in a mapping study concern of vulnerability coverage means greater security. However, a simple

identifying primary studies [135,136]. A sensitivity analysis of the percentage does not take account of specific potential risks of the system
publications retrieved from the Scopus database was conducted to assess for each uncovered vulnerability. The precise percentage required to
the accuracy of the results of the search. Among 108 publications, none ensure “reasonable security” against real-world vulnerabilities cannot
provided security requirements with a formal structure or format, thus currently be defined with certainty. When evaluating an application’s
mitigating this validity threat. security, it is essential to adopt a comprehensive approach that ad-

Internal validity: Internal validity focuses on the process of dresses perceived security, privacy policy transparency, and the security
extracting and analyzing data [135,136]. To avoid overlapping concepts of service delivery [120]. A holistic evaluation encompassing these as-
in the requirements contained in the SEC-CAT, the authors have carried pects can help determine if an application has “reasonable coverage,”
out harmonization of the base documents using a process adapted from ensuring user trust and regulatory compliance [137]. This challenge will
the framework proposed by C. Pardo et al. [98]. be the subject of future work.

As future work, the use of managerial-level security coverage metrics
5. Conclusions and future work obtained through the application of the SEC-AM audit method can be

considered. Each vulnerability linked to a requirement that is not met
This research reviews the literature related to security requirements may be reported. This non-compliance would be reflected in a health

for e-Health from 1991 to July 9, 2023. It served as a starting point to information system security dashboard. Integrated into the DevSecOps

11 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

approach, this dashboard would provide early and real-time feedback of (continued )
the evaluated systems, facilitating informed decision making and the Term Definition
establishment of terms of reference for the development and acquisition systems and software products (including
of IT solutions. This integration would improve the efficiency and services) throughout the life cycle; provides
effectiveness of the audit process, ensuring that e-Health systems meet guidelines for applying the requirements and
high security standards on an ongoing basis and promoting a culture of requirements related processes described in
constant improvement and regulatory compliance. ISO/IEC/IEEE 15,288 and ISO/IEC/IEEE

12207; specifies the required information
Moreover, as a new contribution to strengthening the study and items produced through the implementation of

definition of security requirements in mobile health applications, we the requirements processes; specifies the
propose developing a security requirements catalog for m-health ap- required contents of the required information
plications. This catalog can be implemented and evaluated through a items; provides guidelines for the format of the

continuous audit method aligned with continuous integration method- required and related information items. (…)”
[69]

ologies like DevSecOps. ISO 27002:2022 This document, intended for organizations
As a future effort, a comprehensive catalog of privacy requirements of all types and sizes, is a reference for

for e-Health applications, aligned with norms, standards, guidelines, and determining and implementing controls for
academic works, could be developed to address the identified gaps. This information security risk treatment in an

ISMS based on ISO/IEC 27001. It also
catalog will improve privacy protection in these applications by guides implementing commonly accepted
providing precise, actionable requirements that integrate with frame- information security controls and
works such as OECD Privacy Principles, GDPR, privacy legislation in the developing industry and organization-
United Kingdom and Canada, ISO/IEC 27701, NIST Privacy Framework, specific information security management

and other resources oriented toward privacy. Thus, e-Health applica- guidelines tailored to their specific risk
environments, with additional controls

tions will meet regulatory standards, build user trust, and effectively determined through risk assessment as
protect personal health information. needed. [60]

ISO 27799:2016 This International Standard offers
6. Summary table healthcare organizations and custodians of

personal health information guidance on
protecting its confidentiality, integrity, and

What was already known on the topic availability, extending the general
guidance of ISO/IEC 27002:2013 to

• E-Health applications have advantages but face security breaches, address the unique information security

leading to financial, social, and legal risks and even endangering management needs of the health sector
[90]

patients’ lives. HIPAA The Health Insurance Portability and
• Cases of information security incidents are increasing, exposing the Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) is a
personal health information of millions of patients per year. federal law establishing national standards

• Improving e-Health security by addressing software application to protect sensitive patient health
information from unauthorized disclosure.

vulnerabilities and deficiencies is critical. The US Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) issued the HIPAA Privacy

What this study added to our knowledge Rule to implement HIPAA’s requirements.
This rule applies to all HIPAA-covered

• A security catalog (SEC-CAT) with reusable, traceable, applicable, entities and certain federal agencies,
mandating the confidentiality, integrity,

and auditable requirements developed by e-Health experts facilitates and availability of EPHI based on their
the developing and auditing of more secure, efficient, interoperable, functions and use of such information.
and reliable e-Health applications. [91,139]

• A flexible, technical and objective criteria to measure the percentage HIPAA Security rules The HIPAA Security Rule mandates the
protection of electronically protected

of compliance in implementing and developing e-Health applications health information (EPHI) by requiring all
by an audit method. HIPAA-covered entities, including some

• A layer of abstraction that enhances synergy between technical se- federal agencies, to safeguard the
curity and IT governance, strengthening decision-making and cyber- confidentiality, integrity, and availability

attack prevention for corporate leaders, managers, IT security pro- of EPHI. This rule ensures that EPHI
created, received, maintained, or

fessionals, technology experts, cybersecurity specialists, and transmitted by these entities is protected
academics. against reasonably anticipated threats,

Term Definition hazards, and unauthorized uses or
disclosures. [92,140]

e-Health “(…) e-Health is the cost-effective and secure GDPR The GDPR (General Data Protection
use of information and communication Regulation) is an EU regulation that
technologies (ICT) in support of health and mandates stringent data protection and
health-related fields. It encompasses multiple privacy measures for individuals within the
interventions, including telehealth, EU and EEA, ensuring secure handling and
telemedicine, mobile health (mHealth), control of personal data while protecting
electronic medical or health records (eMR/ fundamental rights and allowing free
eHR), big data, wearables, and even artificial movement of data within the Union
intelligence. The role of e-Health has been without restrictions due to privacy
recognized as pivotal in attaining overarching concerns. [141]
health priorities such as universal health NIST SP 800–53 rev. 5 Establishes the security and privacy
coverage (UHC) and the Sustainable controls for information systems and
Development Goals (SDGs). (…)” [138] organizations, which may be used

ISO 29148:2018 “(…) This document specifies the required voluntarily by nongovernmental
processes implemented in the engineering organizations and is not subject to
activities that result in requirements for copyright in the United States. This

(continued on next column) (continued on next page)

12 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

(continued ) [4] C. Antunes, C. Coutinho, Employment of Artificial Intelligence Mechanisms for e-
Health Systems in Order to Obtain Vital Signs Improving the Processes of Online

Term Definition Consultations and Diagnosis, in: 2022 International Symposium on Sensing and
document is developed by the National Instrumentation in 5G and IoT Era (ISSI), 2022, pp. 109–114, https://doi.org/
Institute of Standards and Technology 10.1109/ISSI55442.2022.9963223.
under the Federal Information Security [5] S. Ouhbi, J.L. Fernández-Alemán, J.M. Carrillo-de-Gea, A. Toval, A. Idri, E-health
Modernization Act (FISMA). [93] internationalization requirements for audit purposes, Comput Methods Programs

Privacy & Security Requirements and It addresses the privacy and security Biomed 144 (2017) 49–60, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2017.03.014.
[6] J. D. Young and A. I. Anton, A Method for Identifying Software Requirements

Considerations for Digital Health challenges of new digital health solutions, Based on Policy Commitments, in: 2010 18th IEEE International Requirements
Solutions such as remote patient monitoring and Engineering Conference, 2010, pp. 47–56. https://doi.org/10.1109/RE.2010.17.

consumer health solutions, and emerging [7] H. S. Gardiyawasam Pussewalage and V. A. Oleshchuk, Privacy preserving
technologies, such as cloud computing and mechanisms for enforcing security and privacy requirements in E-health
mobile devices [94] solutions, Int. J. Inf. Manage., vol. 36, no. 6, Part B, pp. 1161–1173, 2016,

DISA ASD STIG: 2022 This Security Technical Implementation https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.07.006.
Guide, based on NIST 800–53 and related [8] J.L. Fernández-Alemán, A.B.S. García, G. García-Mateos, A. Toval, Technical
documents, is designed to enhance the solutions for mitigating security threats caused by health professionals in clinical
security of Department of Defense (DOD) settings, in: 2015 37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering
information systems. [95] in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2015, pp. 1389–1392, https://doi.org/

OWASP Top 10 Web Application The OWASP Top 10 is a widely recognized 10.1109/EMBC.2015.7318628.
Security Risks:2021 standard awareness document that outlines [9] J.L. Fernández-Alemán, A. Sánchez-Henarejos, A. Toval, A.B. Sánchez-García,

the most critical security risks to web I. Hernández-Hernández, L. Fernandez-Luque, Analysis of health professional
security behaviors in a real clinical setting: An empirical study, Int. J. Med.

applications, providing essential guidance Inform. 84 (6) (2015) 454–467, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2015.01.010.
for developers and web application [10] B. Zapata, J. Fernández-Alemán, A. Toval, Security in Cloud Computing: a
security.[93,142] Mapping Study, Comput. Sci. Inf. Syst. 12 (Jan. 2015) 161–184, https://doi.org/

CWE/SANS TOP 25: 2021 The CWE™ Top 25 list identifies the most 10.2298/CSIS140205086C.
dangerous software weaknesses, which are [11] D. Mairiza, D. Zowghi, N. Nurmuliani, An Investigation into the Notion of Non-
easy to exploit and can lead to severe Functional Requirements, in Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Symposium on
vulnerabilities, serving as a critical Applied Computing, in SAC ’10, Association for Computing Machinery, New
resource for software professionals to York, NY, USA, 2010, pp. 311–317.
mitigate risks. [97,143] [12] T. M. K. Kumar, A Road Map to the Software Engineering Security, in:

Proceedings of the 2009 Second International Conference on Computer and
Electrical Engineering - Volume 02, in ICCEE ’09. USA: IEEE Computer Society,
2010, pp. 306–310. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCEE.2009.62.

[13] N. R. Jennings, Agent-Oriented Software Engineering, in: Proceedings of the 9th
European Workshop on Modelling Autonomous Agents in a Multi-Agent World:

CRediT authorship contribution statement MultiAgent System Engineering, in MAAMAW ’99. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag, 1999, pp. 1–7.

[14] G. Marquez, H. Astudillo, C. Taramasco, Security in Telehealth Systems from a
Carlos M. Mejía-Granda: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Software Engineering Viewpoint: A Systematic Mapping Study, IEEE Access 8

Investigation, Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Soft- (2020) 10933–10950, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2964988.
[15] H.T. Neprash, et al., Trends in Ransomware Attacks on US Hospitals, Clinics, and

ware, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. José L. Fernández- Other Health Care Delivery Organizations, 2016-2021, JAMA Health Forum 3
Alemán: Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Conceptuali- (12) (2022) E224873, https://doi.org/10.1001/jamahealthforum.2022.4873.
zation, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, [16] S.P. Keehan, et al., National health expenditure projections, 2019–28: Expected

Writing – original draft, Writing – review& editing. JuanM. Carrillo de rebound in prices drives rising spending growth, Health Aff. 39 (4) (2020)
704–714, https://doi.org/10.1377/HLTHAFF.2020.00094.

Gea: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Methodology, Supervi- [17] B. Aljedaani, A. Ahmad, M. Zahedi, M.A. Babar, End-users’ knowledge and
sion, Validation, Writing – original draft. José A. García-Berná: Visu- perception about security of clinical mobile health apps: A case study with two
alization, Data curation, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Saudi Arabian mHealth providers, J. Syst. Softw. 195 (2023), https://doi.org/

10.1016/j.jss.2022.111519.
Validation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. [18] J.C. Maxwell, A.I. Antón, in: The Production Rule Framework: Developing a

Canonical Set of Software Requirements for Compliance with Law, Association for
Declaration of competing interest Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2010, pp. 629–636, https://doi.org/

10.1145/1882992.1883092.
[19] T. Breaux, A. Antón, Analyzing Regulatory Rules for Privacy and Security

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial Requirements, IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 34 (1) (2008) 5–20, https://doi.org/
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 10.1109/TSE.2007.70746.

[20] F.T. Chimuco, J.B.F. Sequeiros, C.G. Lopes, T.M.C. Simões, M.M. Freire, P.R.
the work reported in this paper. M. Inácio, Secure cloud-based mobile apps: attack taxonomy, requirements,

mechanisms, tests and automation, Int. J. Inf. Secur. 22 (4) (2023) 833–867,
Acknowledgments https://doi.org/10.1007/s10207-023-00669-z.

[21] J.D. Young, Commitment analysis to operationalize software requirements from
privacy policies, Requir. Eng. 16 (1) (2011) 33–46, https://doi.org/10.1007/

This study is a component of the OASSIS-UMU (PID2021-122554OB- s00766-010-0108-6.
C32) project and the Network of Excellence in Software Quality and [22] A.K. Massey, P.N. Otto, L.J. Hayward, A.I. Antón, Evaluating existing security and

Sustainability (RED2022-134656-T), all of which are funded by the privacy requirements for legal compliance, Requir. Eng. 15 (1) (2010) 119–137,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00766-009-0089-5.

Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation, and Universities. Additionally, [23] G. McGraw, Software Security: Building Security In, Addison-Wesley
the European Regional Development Fund established these initiatives Professional, 2006.
(ERDF). [24] B. Smith, et al., Challenges for Protecting the Privacy of Health Information:

Required Certification Can Leave Common Vulnerabilities Undetected, in:
Proceedings of the Second Annual Workshop on Security and Privacy in Medical

References and Home-Care Systems, in SPIMACS ’10, Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 2010, pp. 1–12.

[1] P. Singh, E-Health Application for E-Blood Analysis, E-Diagnosis, and Digital Diet [25] E.R. Aruna, A.R.M. Reddy, K.V.N. Sunitha, in: elicitation and Analysis of Security
Guidance, Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. vol. 1194 (2020) 343–350, https://doi.org/ Requirements and Patterns for IoT Based Health Monitor, in: Advances in
10.1007/978-3-030-32622-7_32. Cybernetics, Cognition, and Machine Learning for Communication Technologies,

[2] S. Roy, U. Roy, D. Sinha, R.K. Pal, Imbalanced ensemble learning in determining Springer Singapore, Singapore, 2020, pp. 49–56, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
Parkinson’s disease using Keystroke dynamics, Expert. Syst. Appl. 217 (2023), 981-15-3125-5_6.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.119522. [26] Vulnerabilities | OWASP Foundation. [Online]. Available: https://owasp.

[3] H. Van Uytsel, et al., Effect of the e-health supported INTER-ACT lifestyle org/www-community/vulnerabilities/.
intervention on postpartum weight retention and body composition, and [27] M. Alqaradaghi, M. Z. I. Nazir, and T. Kozsik, Design and Implement an Accurate
associations with lifestyle behavior: A randomized controlled trial, Prev. Med Automated Static Analysis Checker to Detect Insecure Use of SecurityManager,
(baltim) 164 (2022), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2022.107321. Computers, vol. 12, no. 12, 2023, https://doi.org/10.3390/computers12120247.

13 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

[28] A. Agrawal, et al., Evaluating the Security Impact of Healthcare Web Applications Prospective Solutions, IEEE Access 9 (2021) 7152–7169, https://doi.org/
Through Fuzzy Based Hybrid Approach of Multi-Criteria Decision-Making 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3048839.
Analysis, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 135770–135783, https://doi.org/10.1109/ [52] E. A. P. Rincón and L. G. Moreno-Sandoval, Design of an architecture contributing
ACCESS.2020.3010729. to the protection and privacy of the data associated with the electronic health

[29] N. Kshetri, J. Voas, Ransomware as a Business (RaaB), IT Prof. 24 (2) (2022) record, Information (Switzerland), vol. 12, no. 8, 2021, https://doi.org/10.3390/
83–87, https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2022.3157208. info12080313.

[30] FinCEN Analysis Reveals Ransomware Reporting in BSA Filings Increased [53] A. Sengupta and H. Subramanian, User Control of Personal mHealth Data Using a
Significantly During the Second Half of 2021 | FinCEN.gov. [Online]. Available: Mobile Blockchain App: Design Science Perspective, JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, vol.
https://www.fincen.gov/news/news-releases/fincen-analysis-reveals-ransomwar 10, no. 1, 2022, https://doi.org/10.2196/32104.
e-reporting-bsa-filings-increased-significantly. [54] A. Farouk, A. Alahmadi, S. Ghose, A. Mashatan, Blockchain platform for

[31] L. Coventry, D. Branley, Cybersecurity in healthcare: A narrative review of trends, industrial healthcare: Vision and future opportunities, Comput. Commun. 154
threats and ways forward, Maturitas 113 (Apr. 2018) 48–52, https://doi.org/ (2020) 223–235, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2020.02.058.
10.1016/j.maturitas.2018.04.008. [55] H. Subramanian and S. Subramanian, Improving Diagnosis through Digital

[32] S.B. Weber, S. Stein, M. Pilgermann, T. Schrader, Attack Detection for Medical Pathology: Proof-of-Concept Implementation Using Smart Contracts and
Cyber-Physical Systems-A Systematic Literature Review, IEEE Access 11 (2023) Decentralized File Storage, J Med Internet Res, vol. 24, no. 3, 2022, https://doi.
41796–41815, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3270225. org/10.2196/34207.

[33] P. J. Escamilla Ambrosio et al., Securing mHealth applications using IoTsecM [56] K. Miyachi and T. K. Mackey, hOCBS: A privacy-preserving blockchain framework
security modelling, Computacion y Sistemas, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 1139–1158, 2019, for healthcare data leveraging an on-chain and off-chain system design, Inf.
https://doi.org/10.13053/CyS-23-4-3093. Process Manag., vol. 58, no. 3, 2021, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2021.10

[34] B. Aljedaani, A. Ahmad, M. Zahedi, M.A. Babar, End-users’ knowledge and 2535.
perception about security of clinical mobile health apps: A case study with two [57] Z. Nie, Y. Long, S. Zhang, and Y. Lu, A controllable privacy data transmission
Saudi Arabian mHealth providers, J. Syst. Softw. 195 (2023) 111519, https://doi. mechanism for Internet of things system based on blockchain, Int. J. Distrib. Sens.
org/10.1016/j.jss.2022.111519. Netw., vol. 18, no. 3, 2022, https://doi.org/10.1177/15501329221088450.

[35] R. Jáuregui-Velarde, D. H. Celis, C. Y. Arias, and L. Andrade-Arenas, A critical [58] F. Rezaeibagha, K.T. Win, W. Susilo, A Systematic Literature Review on Security
review of the state of computer security in the health sector, Bulletin of Electrical and Privacy of Electronic Health Record Systems: Technical Perspectives, Health
Engineering and Informatics, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 3805–3816, 2023, https://doi. Inform. Manage. J. 44 (3) (Oct. 2015) 23–38, https://doi.org/10.1177/
org/10.11591/eei.v12i6.5394. 183335831504400304.

[36] R.U. Rasool, H.F. Ahmad, W. Rafique, A. Qayyum, J. Qadir, Security and privacy [59] ISO/IEC 27001 Standard – Information Security Management Systems, (2022).
of internet of medical things: A contemporary review in the age of surveillance, https://www.iso.org/standard/27001 (accessed March 9, 2024).
botnets, and adversarial ML, J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 201 (2022), https://doi.org/ [60] ISO/IEC 27002 Standard – Information security, cybersecurity and privacy
10.1016/j.jnca.2022.103332. protection — Information security controls, (2022). https://www.iso.org/

[37] D. Noori, H. Shakeri, M. Niazi Torshiz, An elliptic curve cryptosystem-based standard/75652.html (accessed March 9, 2024).
secure RFID mutual authentication for Internet of things in healthcare [61] O. Olukoya, Assessing frameworks for eliciting privacy & security requirements
environment, EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw. 1 (2022) 2022, https://doi.org/ from laws and regulations, Comput. Secur. 117 (2022), https://doi.org/10.1016/
10.1186/s13638-022-02146-y. j.cose.2022.102697.

[38] M.-D. Cano, A. Cañavate-Sanchez, K. Sha, Preserving Data Privacy in the Internet [62] C. Ilioudis, G. Pangalos, A Framework for an Institutional High Level Security
of Medical Things Using Dual Signature ECDSA, Sec. Commun. Netw. 2020 (Jan. Policy for the Processing of Medical Data and their Transmission through the
2020), https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/4960964. Internet, J. Med. Internet Res. 3 (2) (2001) e14.

[39] A.M. Norouzzadeh Gil Molk, M.R. Aref, R. Ramazani Khorshiddoust, Leveled [63] P.N. Otto and A.I. Anton, Addressing Legal Requirements in Requirements
Design of Cryptography Algorithms Using Cybernetic Methods for Using in Engineering, in: 15th IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference
Telemedicine Applications, Comput. Intell. Neurosci. (2021), https://doi.org/ (RE 2007), 2007, pp. 5–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/RE.2007.65.
10.1155/2021/3583275. [64] T.D. Breaux, D.L. Baumer, J. Doyle, E.H. Spafford, and M.A. Vouk, Legal

[40] R. K. N.V., M. K. P., Application of SDN for secure communication in IoT Requirements Acquisition for the Specification of Legally Compliant Information
environment, Comput. Commun. 151 (2020) 60–65, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Systems, (2009). https://repository.lib.ncsu.edu/handle/1840.16/3376
comcom.2019.12.046. (accessed March 9, 2024).

[41] T. Tervoort, M.T. De Oliveira, W. Pieters, P. Van Gelder, S.D. Olabarriaga, [65] F.A. Al-Zahrani, Evaluating the Usable-Security of Healthcare Software Through
H. Marquering, Solutions for Mitigating Cybersecurity Risks Caused by Legacy Unified Technique of Fuzzy Logic, ANP and TOPSIS, IEEE Access 8 (2020)
Software in Medical Devices: A Scoping Review, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 109905–109916, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3001996.
84352–84361, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2984376. [66] P. Llorens-Vernet and J. Miró, Standards for mobile health-related apps:

[42] A.J. Ghazali, W. Al-Nuaimy, A. Al-Ataby, M.A. Al-Taee, Building IPv6 based Systematic review and development of a guide, JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, vol. 8, no.
tunneling mechanisms for VoIP security, in: 2016 13th International Multi- 3, 2020, https://doi.org/10.2196/13057.
Conference on Systems, Signals & Devices (SSD), 2016, pp. 171–176, https://doi. [67] C. Pardo, F. Pino, F. García, F. R. Romero, M. Piattini, and M. T. Baldassarre,
org/10.1109/SSD.2016.7473737. HProcessTOOL: A Support Tool in the Harmonization of Multiple Reference

[43] W. Iqbal, H. Abbas, M. Daneshmand, B. Rauf, Y.A. Bangash, An In-Depth Analysis Models, in: Computational Science and Its Applications - ICCSA 2011, B.
of IoT Security Requirements, Challenges, and Their Countermeasures via Murgante, O. Gervasi, A. Iglesias, D. Taniar, and B. O. Apduhan, Eds., Berlin,
Software-Defined Security, IEEE Internet Things J. 7 (10) (2020) 10250–10276, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 370–382.
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.2997651. [68] C. Pardo, F. Pino, F. Garcia, M. Piattini, M. Baldassarre, A Process for Driving the

[44] R. Rawat, V. Mahor, B. Garg, M. Chouhan, K. Pachlasiya, S. Telang, in: chapter Harmonization of Models, ACM Int. Conf. Proceeding Ser (Jun. 2010), https://
Fifteen - Modeling of Cyber Threat Analysis and Vulnerability in IoT-Based doi.org/10.1145/1961258.1961271.
Healthcare Systems during COVID, in Lessons from COVID-19, Academic Press, [69] IEEE/ISO/IEC 29148 Standard – Systems and software engineering – Life cycle
2022, pp. 405–425, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99878-9.00016-9. processes – Requirements engineering, (2018). https://standards.ieee.

[45] S. S. Ambarkar and N. Shekokar, Toward Smart and Secure IoT Based Healthcare org/ieee/29148/6937/ (accessed March 9, 2024).
System, in Internet of Things, Smart Computing and Technology: A Roadmap [70] A. Toval, J. Nicolás Ros, B. Moros Valle, and F. Garcia, Requirements Reuse for
Ahead, N. Dey, Parikshit. N. Mahalle, P. M. Shafi, V. V Kimabahune, and A. E. Improving Information Systems Security: A Practitioner’s Approach, Requir. Eng.,
Hassanien, Eds., Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 283–303. vol. 6, pp. 205–219, Jan. 2002, https://doi.org/10.1007/PL00010360.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-39047-1_13. [71] P. Mongeon, A. Paul-Hus, The journal coverage of Web of Science and Scopus: a

[46] S. Kaddoura, R. A. Haraty, K. Al Kontar, and O. Alfandi, A Parallelized Database comparative analysis, Scientometrics 106 (1) (2016) 213–228, https://doi.org/
Damage Assessment Approach after Cyberattack for Healthcare Systems, Future 10.1007/s11192-015-1765-5.
Internet, vol. 13, no. 4, 2021, https://doi.org/10.3390/fi13040090. [72] M.M. Pellegrini, F. Ciampi, G. Marzi, B. Orlando, The relationship between

[47] A. Sharma, H. Babbar, A.K. Vats, Detection of Attacks in Smart Healthcare knowledge management and leadership: mapping the field and providing future
deploying Machine Learning Algorithms*, in: 2023 4th International Conference research avenues, J. Knowl. Manag. 24 (6) (2020) 1445–1492, https://doi.org/
for Emerging Technology (INCET), 2023, pp. 1–6, https://doi.org/10.1109/ 10.1108/JKM-01-2020-0034.
INCET57972.2023.10170367. [73] J.A. García-Berná, et al., Green IT and sustainable technology development:

[48] M. Habiba, M.R. Islam, S.M. Muyeen, A.B.M.S. Ali, Edge intelligence for network Bibliometric overview, Sustain. Dev. 27 (4) (Jul. 2019) 613–636, https://doi.org/
intrusion prevention in IoT ecosystem, Comput. Electr. Eng. 108 (2023) 108727, 10.1002/SD.1927.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2023.108727. [74] J. Yuen, Comparison of Impact Factor, Eigenfactor Metrics, and SCImago Journal

[49] I. Singh and S.-W. Lee, SRE_BBC: A Self-Adaptive Security Enabled Requirements Rank Indicator and h-index for Neurosurgical and Spinal Surgical Journals, World
Engineering Approach for SLA Smart Contracts in Blockchain-Based Cloud Neurosurg. 119 (2018) e328–e337, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
Systems, Sensors (Basel), vol. 22, no. 10, 2022, https://doi.org/10.3390/ wneu.2018.07.144.
s22103903. [75] P.W. Stone, Popping the (PICO) question in research and evidence-based practice,

[50] D. Lee, M. Song, MEXchange: A Privacy-Preserving Blockchain-Based Framework Appl. Nurs. Res. 15 (3) (2002) 197–198, https://doi.org/10.1053/
for Health Information Exchange Using Ring Signature and Stealth Address, IEEE apnr.2002.34181.
Access 9 (2021) 158122–158139, https://doi.org/10.1109/ [76] N.J. van Eck, L. Waltman, Software survey: VOSviewer, a computer program for
ACCESS.2021.3130552. bibliometric mapping, Scientometrics 84 (2) (2010) 523–538, https://doi.org/

[51] M. Hijji, G. Alam, A Multivocal Literature Review on Growing Social Engineering 10.1007/s11192-009-0146-3.
Based Cyber-Attacks/Threats during the COVID-19 Pandemic: Challenges and

14 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

[77] D. Moher et al., Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta- Stand. Interfaces 32 (4) (2010) 166–178, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
analyses: the PRISMA statement, PLoS Med, vol. 6, no. 7, 2009, https://doi.org csi.2010.01.001.
/10.1371/JOURNAL.PMED.1000097. [106] M.A. Aguilar, A. Toval, M. Campos, Requirements Engineering to Audit Privacy

[78] M.J. Page, et al., The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting Issues in, Medical and Health Software, 2008.
systematic reviews, BMJ 372 (Mar. 2021) n71, https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n71. [107] B. Cruz Zapata, J.L. Fernández-Alemán, A. Toval, A. Idri, Reusable Software

[79] W. G. Cochran, Sampling techniques, 3rd ed. in: Wiley series in probability and Usability Specifications for mHealth Applications, J. Med. Syst. 42 (3) (2018) 45,
mathematical statistics. New York [etc: John Wiley & Sons, 1977. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-018-0902-0.

[80] G. Kotonya, I. Sommerville, Requirements Engineering: Processes and Techniques, 1st [108] P. Krishnan, C. Cifuentes, L. Li, T.F. Bissyande, J. Klein, Why Is Static Application
ed., Wiley Publishing, 1998. Security Testing Hard to Learn? IEEE Secur. Priv. 21 (5) (2023) 68–72, https://

[81] IEEE 830 Standard – Recommended Practice for Software Requirements doi.org/10.1109/MSEC.2023.3287206.
Specifications, (1998). https://standards.ieee.org/ieee/830/1222/ (accessed [109] C. Cifuentes, F. Gauthier, B. Hassanshahi, P. Krishnan, D. McCall, The role of
March 9, 2024). program analysis in security vulnerability detection: Then and now, Comput.

[82] S. Ouhbi, J.L. Fernández-Alemán, J.R. Pozo, M. El Bajta, A. Toval, A. Idri, Secur. 135 (2023), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2023.103463.
Compliance of Blood Donation Apps with Mobile OS Usability Guidelines, J. Med. [110] F. M. Tudela, J. R. B. Higuera, J. B. Higuera, J. A. S. Montalvo, and M. I. Argyros,
Syst. 39 (6) (2015) 63, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-015-0243-1. On Combining Static, Dynamic and Interactive Analysis Security Testing Tools to

[83] J.A. García-Berná, et al., Energy efficiency in software: A case study on Improve OWASP Top Ten Security Vulnerability Detection in Web Applications,
sustainability in personal health records, J. Clean. Prod. 282 (2021) 124262, Appl. Sci.-Basel, vol. 10, no. 24, 2020, https://doi.org/10.3390/app10249119.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124262. [111] V. Casola, A. De Benedictis, C. Mazzocca, V. Orbinato, Secure software

[84] J.M. Carrillo de Gea, J. Nicolás Ros, J. Fernández-Alemán, A. Toval, Automated development and testing: A model-based methodology, Comput. Secur. 137
support for reuse-based requirements engineering in global software engineering, (2024) 103639, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2023.103639.
J. Softw. Evol. Process 29 (2017) May, https://doi.org/10.1002/smr.1873. [112] CyberRes, Static Code Analyzer - Static Code Analysis Security, (2024). https

[85] J. Nicolás, J. Lasheras, A. Toval, F.J. Ortiz, B. Álvarez, An integrated domain ://www.microfocus.com/en-us/cyberres/application-security/static-code-
analysis approach for teleoperated systems, Requir. Eng. 14 (1) (2009) 27–46, analyzer (accessed March 9, 2024).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00766-008-0072-6. [113] Acunetix, Vulnerability Scanner - Web Application Security, (2024). https://

[86] A. Toval, B. Moros Valle, J. Nicolás Ros, J. Lasheras, Eight key issues for an www.acunetix.com/vulnerability-scanner/ (accessed March 9, 2024).
effective reuse-based requirements process, Comput. Syst. Sci. Eng. 23 (2008) [114] C. M. Mejía-Granda, Desarrollo de servicios web REST ‘inseguros’ para auto-
373–385. aprendizaje en la explotación de vulnerabilidades, (2018). https://reunir.unir.

[87] D.L. Hamilton, “Identification and evaluation of the security requirements in net/handle/123456789/7435 (accessed March 28, 2023).
medical applications,” in, Proceedings Fifth Annual IEEE Symposium on [115] OpenEMR, (2020). https://www.open-emr.org/ (accessed June 6, 2020).
Computer-Based Medical Systems 1992 (1992) 129–137, https://doi.org/ [116] Y. Wang, P. Tran, and J. Wojtusiak, From Wearable Device to OpenEMR: 5G Edge
10.1109/CBMS.1992.244954. Centered Telemedicine and Decision Support System, in: International Conference

[88] H.J. Baur, U. Engelmann, F. Saurbier, A. Schröter, U. Baur, H.P. Meinzer, How to on Health Informatics, (2022). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
deal with security issues in teleradiology, Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 53 247114293 (accessed March 28, 2023).
(1) (1997) 1–8, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-2607(96)01798-1. [117] Y. He, E. Zamani, I. Yevseyeva, and C. Luo, Artificial Intelligence–Based Ethical

[89] A. Strielkina, O. Illiashenko, M. Zhydenko, D. Uzun, Cybersecurity of healthcare Hacking for Health Information Systems: Simulation Study, J. Med. Internet Res.,
IoT-based systems: Regulation and case-oriented assessment, in: 2018 IEEE 9th vol. 25, p. e41748, 2023, https://doi.org/10.2196/41748.
International Conference on Dependable Systems, Services and Technologies [118] M.M. Moncy, M. Pilli, M. Somasundaram, S. Purkayastha, and C.R. Fulton,
(DESSERT), 2018, pp. 67–73, https://doi.org/10.1109/DESSERT.2018.8409101. Evaluation of accessibility of open-source EHRs for visually impaired users, in:

[90] ISO 27799 Standard — Health informatics — Information security management AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, vol. 2023, pp. 1165–1174, (2024). https
in health using ISO/IEC 27002, (2016). https://www.iso.org/standard/62777. ://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38222344 (accessed March 9, 2024).
html (accessed March 9, 2024). [119] OpenEMR, OpenEMR Downloads - OpenEMR Project Wiki, (2024). https://www.

[91] N. Archives and R. A. O. of the Federal Register, Public Law 104 - 191 - Health open-emr.org/wiki/index.php/OpenEMR_Downloads (accessed March 9, 2024).
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, (1996). https://www.go [120] M. Siavvas, D. Kehagias, D. Tzovaras, E. Gelenbe, A hierarchical model for
vinfo.gov/app/details/PLAW-104publ191 (accessed March 9, 2024). quantifying software security based on static analysis alerts and software metrics,

[92] eCFR :: 45 CFR Part 164 Subpart C – Security Standards for the Protection of Softw. Qual. J. 29 (2) (2021) 431–507, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11219-021-
Electronic Protected Health Information. Accessed: Sep. 27, 2023. [Online]. 09555-0.
Available: https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-45/subtitle-A/subchapter-C/ [121] J. Dougherty, R. Kohavi, and M. Sahami, Supervised and Unsupervised
part-164/subpart-C. Discretization of Continuous Features, in: International Conference on Machine

[93] J. T. Force, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Learning, (1995). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:2527609 (accessed
Organizations, Jul. 2020, https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-53R5. March 9, 2024).

[94] Canada Health Infoway, Privacy and Security Requirements and Considerations [122] J.M. Carrillo De Gea, J. Nicolás, J.L. Fernández Alemán, A. Toval, C. Ebert,
for Digital Health Solutions, (2014). https://www.infoway-inforoute.ca/en/co A. Vizcaíno, Requirements engineering tools: Capabilities, survey and assessment,
mponent/edocman/resources/technical-documents/architecture/2154-privacy- Inf. Softw. Technol. 54 (10) (2012) 1142–1157, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
and-security-requirements-and-considerations-for-digital-health-solutions infsof.2012.04.005.
(accessed March 9, 2024). [123] J. Ning, X. Huang, W. Susilo, K. Liang, X. Liu, Y. Zhang, Dual Access Control for

[95] Unified Compliance Framework, Application Security and Development Security Cloud-Based Data Storage and Sharing, IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.
Technical Implementation Guide, (2024). https://www.stigviewer.com/sti 19 (2) (2022) 1036–1048, https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2020.3011525.
g/application_security_and_development/ (accessed March 9, 2024). [124] C.M. Mejía-Granda, J.L. Fernández-Alemán, J.M. Carrillo-de-Gea, J.A. García-

[96] OWASP Foundation, OWASP Top 10, (2021). https://owasp.org/Top10/en/ Berná, Security vulnerabilities in healthcare: an analysis of medical devices and
(accessed March 9, 2024). software, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 62 (1) (2024) 257–273, https://doi.org/

[97] SANS Institute, Top 25 Software Errors, (2021). https://www.sans.org/top 10.1007/s11517-023-02912-0.
25-software-errors/ (accessed March 9, 2024). [125] D. Chauhan, C. Singh, D. Kudande, Y.-C. Hu, Cyber Security for IoT-Enabled

[98] C. Pardo, F. Pino, F. Garcia, M. Piattini, and J. Rosado, Armonizando ISO/IEC Industry 4.0, IGI Global (2022) 89–124, https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-6684-
20000 e ISO/IEC 27001 para integrar la gestión de servicios y la seguridad de la 6444-1.ch006.
información. 2010. [126] M.Y.P.M. Yusof, C.H. Teo, C.J. Ng, Electronic informed consent criteria for

[99] C. Pardo, F. Pino, F. Garcia, and M. Piattini, Homogenization of Models to research ethics review: a scoping review, BMC Med. Ethics 23 (1) (2022) 117,
Support Multi-model Processes in Improvement Environments., vol. 1. 2009. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12910-022-00849-x.

[100] F.J. Pino, M.T. Baldassarre, M. Piattini, G. Visaggio, Harmonizing maturity levels [127] S. Mikuletič, S. Vrhovec, B. Skela-Savič, and B. Žvanut, Security and privacy
from CMMI-DEV and ISO/IEC 15504, J. Softw. Maint. Evol. Res. Pract. 22 (4) oriented information security culture (ISC): Explaining unauthorized access to
(Jun. 2010) 279–296, https://doi.org/10.1002/spip.437. healthcare data by nursing employees, Comput. Secur., vol. 136, p. 103489, 2024,

[101] OWASP Foundation, OWASP Top Ten, (2024). https://owasp.org/www-project https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2023.103489.
-top-ten/ (accessed March 9, 2024). [128] D.G. Arce, Cybersecurity and platform competition in the cloud, Computers &

[102] AICPA & CIMA, T. A. I. of CPAs, Information for service organization Security, 93, 101774, (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2020.101774.
management in a SOC 1® engagement, (2023). https://www.aicpa-cima.com/ [129] A. A. Süzen, UNI-CAPTCHA: A Novel Robust and Dynamic User-Non-Interaction
resources/download/information-for-service-organization-management-in-a-so CAPTCHA Model Based on Hybrid biLSTM+Softmax, Journal of Information
c-1-engagement (accessed March 9, 2024). Security and Applications, vol. 63, p. 103036, 2021, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.

[103] AICPA & CIMA, T. A. I. of CPAs, SOC 2® - SOC for Service Organizations: Trust jisa.2021.103036.
Services Criteria, (2023). https://www.aicpa-cima.com/topic/audit-assurance/ [130] M. Guerar, A. Merlo, M. Migliardi, F. Palmieri, Invisible CAPPCHA: A usable
audit-and-assurance-greater-than-soc-2 (accessed March 9, 2024). mechanism to distinguish between malware and humans on the mobile IoT,

[104] AICPA & CIMA, T. A. I. of CPAs, SOC 3® - SOC for Service Organizations: Trust Comput. Secur. 78 (2018) 255–266, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2018.06.007.
Services Criteria for General Use Report, (2023). https://www.aicpa-cima.com/t [131] M. Azeem, D. Khan, S. Iftikhar, S. Bawazeer, and M. Alzahrani, Analyzing and
opic/audit-assurance/audit-and-assurance-greater-than-soc-3 (accessed March 9, comparing the effectiveness of malware detection: A study of machine learning
2024). approaches, Heliyon, vol. 10, no. 1, p. e23574, 2024, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.

[105] M.A. Martínez, J. Lasheras, E. Fernández-Medina, A. Toval, M. Piattini, heliyon.2023.e23574.
A Personal Data Audit Method through Requirements Engineering, Comput. [132] K. Habib, W. Leister, Threats identification for the smart Internet of Things in

eHealth and adaptive security countermeasures, in: 2015 7th International

15 



C.M. Mejía-Granda et al. International Journal of Medical Informatics 194 (2025) 105699 

Conference on New Technologies, Mobility and Security (NTMS), 2015, pp. 1–5, José L. Fernández Alemán is an associate professor with the
https://doi.org/10.1109/NTMS.2015.7266525. Software Engineering Research Group, Faculty of Computer

[133] J. Loonam, J. Zwiegelaar, V. Kumar, C. Booth, Cyber-Resiliency for Digital Science, University of Murcia, Murcia, ES-30100, Spain. Con-
Enterprises: A Strategic Leadership Perspective, IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag. 69 (6) tact him at aleman@um.es
(2022) 3757–3770, https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2020.2996175.

[134] R. Sobrino-Duque, J. M. Carrillo-de-Gea, J. J. López-Jiménez, J. Nicolás Ros, and
J. L. Fernández-Alemán, Usevalia: Managing Inspection-Based Usability Audits,
Int. J. Hum. Comput. Interact., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 719–743, Feb. 2024, https://
doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2022.2121879.

[135] A. Ampatzoglou, S. Charalampidou, I. Stamelos, Research state of the art on GoF
design patterns: A mapping study, J. Syst. Softw. 86 (7) (2013) 1945–1964,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2013.03.063.

[136] F. Elberzhager, J. Münch, V.T.N. Nha, A systematic mapping study on the
combination of static and dynamic quality assurance techniques, Inf. Softw.
Technol. 54 (1) (2012) 1–15, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2011.06.003.

[137] M. Hatamian, Engineering Privacy in Smartphone Apps: A Technical Guideline
Catalog for App Developers, IEEE Access. 8 (2020) 35429–35445, https://doi. Juan M. Carrillo de Gea is an associate professor with the
org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2974911. Software Engineering Research Group, Faculty of Computer

[138] World Health Organization, Guiding optimal development and use of digital Science, University of Murcia, Murcia, ES-30100, Spain. Con-
health towards improved health outcomes, (2024). https://www.who.int/west tact him at jmcdg1@um.es.
ernpacific/activities/guiding-optimal-development-and-use-of-digital-health-tow
ards-improved-health-outcomes (accessed March 9, 2024).

[139] U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) | Public Health Law | CDC, (1996). htt
ps://www.cdc.gov/phlp/php/resources/health-insurance-portability-and-a
ccountability-act-of-1996-hipaa.html (accessed March 9, 2024).

[140] J. A. Marron, HIPAA Security Rule | NIST, 2022, 10.6028/NIST.SP.800-66R2.IPD.
[141] I. T. G. P. TEAM, EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) – An

implementation and compliance guide, fourth edition. IT Governance Publishing,
2020. 10.2307/j.ctv17f12pc.

[142] AICPA & CIMA, T. A. I. of CPAs, Learn about SOC for Cybersecurity – Resources,
(2018). https://www.aicpa-cima.com/resources/download/learn-about-soc-for
-cybersecurity (accessed March 9, 2024). José A. García-Berná is a researcher with the Software Engi-

[143] Common Weakness Enumeration, CWE Top 25 Most Dangerous Software neering Research Group, Faculty of Computer Science, Uni-
Weaknesses, (2022). https://cwe.mitre.org/top25/archive/2022/2022_cwe versity of Murcia, Murcia, ES-30100, Spain. Contact him at
_top25.html (accessed March 9, 2024). josealberto.garcia1@um.es

Carlos M. Mejía-Granda is a Ph.D. candidate in Informatics
Engineering at the Faculty of Computer Science, University of
Murcia, Murcia, ES-30100, Spain. Contact him at carlosmi-
chael.mejiag@um.es

16